ADR 002: Doctrine Test Architecture (#75)
pyx-industries/julee: docs/ADRs/002-doctrine-test-architecture.md

4. **Maintainability**: Developers can navigate any Julee solution because they all follow the same patterns

The technical architecture is Clean Architecture with strict opinions about code organization. These opinions must be enforced automatically - documentation alone is insufficient because it drifts from reality.

## Decision

**Doctrine is the set of architectural rules that all Julee solutions must follow. Tests ARE the doctrine - they both express and enforce the rules.**

### What Doctrine Covers

Doctrine defines the structural constraints for a valid Julee solution. The categories of doctrine correspond to the entities in the framework's core domain model:

| Domain Entity | Doctrine Enforces |
|---------------|-------------------|
| **Bounded Context** | What constitutes a valid bounded context (domain/models or domain/use_cases required) |
| **Repository Protocol** | Repository interfaces live in domain/, implementations in infrastructure/ |
| **Service Protocol** | Service interfaces live in domain/, implementations in infrastructure/ |

> | **Use Case** | Business logic lives in use_cases/, has execute() method taking request/response objects |

Reviewer: It's not clear to me yet (but will probably become clear later) what the request/response objects are... by name they sound like http request/response, but as this is in the domain/use_cases I'm guessing it's something else.

Author: Ah, yes but no but sort-of.

Requests and responses are the contract between the usecase and the things that invoke it. They are not specifically coupled to the domain layer (usecase internals), they are the "public face" of the domain-layer interactions. FastAPI just so happens to thinly wrap them into HTTP API, but the temporal worker doesn't (for example). entities are the language of the contract with services and repositories, requests/responses are the language of contracts with usecases - different layer.

### Three Levels of Tests

| Level | Location | Purpose |
|-------|----------|---------|
| **Doctrine** | `shared/tests/domain/use_cases/test_*_doctrine.py` | Universal rules for all Julee solutions |
| **Framework** | `shared/tests/` (non-doctrine) | Tests specific to framework implementation |
| **Domain** | `{bounded_context}/tests/` | Tests for specific bounded context behavior |

Only doctrine tests use MUST/MAY/MUST NOT language. Other tests are ordinary unit/integration tests.

## Consequences

### Positive

1. **Architectural compliance is verifiable**: Run pytest to check any solution
2. **Single source of truth**: Rules cannot diverge from enforcement
3. **Tool-friendly structure**: Consistent patterns enable automation
4. **Supply chain transparency**: Every component's role is explicit and discoverable
5. **Traceability**: Clear path from business rules (use cases) to implementation (infrastructure)
6. **Progressive disclosure**: Read at docstring level or implementation level

### Negative

1. **Rigidity**: Less flexibility than a permissive framework

> 2. **Learning curve**: Developers must understand Clean Architecture concepts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Learning curve**: Developers must learn Clean Architecture concepts as they work with the framework and enforced doctrine.
```

### Neutral

1. **Framework-dependent solutions**: Solutions are tightly coupled to Julee conventions

## Alternatives Considered

### 1. Documentation-Only Architecture

Write architecture rules in markdown, trust developers to follow them.

> **Rejected**: Rules drift from reality. No automated verification.

Reviewer: Yep, it already did drift very fast when it's not in context, especially so when working with generative AI.

Author: :+1: exactly, it's not just human developers that need to be kept on the rails.
